# jacquin.xyz

Artiste à temps plein. Apprécie la lenteur et la simplicité.

```
     _
   .~q`,
  {__,  \
      \' \
       \  \
        \  \
         \  `._            __.__
          \    ~-._  _.==~~     ~~--.._
           \        '                  ~-.
            \      _-   -_                `.
             \    /       }        .-    .  \
              `. |      /  }      (       ;  \
                `|     /  /       (       :   '\
                 \    |  /        |      /       \
                  |     /`-.______.\     |~-.      \
                  |   |/           (     |   `.      \_
                  |   ||            ~\   \      '._    `-.._____..----..___
                  |   |/             _\   \         ~-.__________.-~~~~~~~~~'''
                .o'___/            .o______}
```


## Programmes

=> edit.{{EXTENSION}} edit - simple text editor
=> safe.{{EXTENSION}} safe - simple symmetric-key password encrypter
=> clic.{{EXTENSION}} clic - command line interface companion
=> gmip.{{EXTENSION}} gmip - gemtext presentation tool
=> todo.{{EXTENSION}} todo - simple task manager
=> gmi2html.{{EXTENSION}} gmi2html.awk
=> minestorm.html minestorm
=> https://github.com/arthur-jacquin/numworks-games numworks-games

En cours :
* grid - spreadsheet calculator
* cc - C99 compiler
* os - operating system


## Blog

=> paps_magnum.{{EXTENSION}} Accord mets et vin PAPSxMagnum
=> profession_de_foi.{{EXTENSION}} Profession de foi
=> verite.{{EXTENSION}} De la vérité
=> biens_communs.{{EXTENSION}} Des biens communs
=> middle_management.{{EXTENSION}} Contre le middle management

### Building a graphical multi-user spreadsheet editor in Zig

=> grid_series.{{EXTENSION}} Series homepage
=> grid_introduction.{{EXTENSION}} Building a graphical multi-user spreadsheet editor in Zig, introduction
=> multithreading_test.{{EXTENSION}} Trying out multithreading
=> data_model.{{EXTENSION}} Laying the foundations for the data model
=> client_architecture.{{EXTENSION}} Designing the client architecture
=> managing_signals.{{EXTENSION}} Managing signals in a multithreaded environment


## Art ASCII

=> shadoks.txt shadoks
=> jattelik.txt jattelik
=> jattelika.txt jattelika
=> mini_jattelik.txt mini_jattelik


## Autres projets

=> prepa.{{EXTENSION}} prepa
=> https://github.com/arthur-jacquin/while-lang while-lang
=> tipe.html tipe
=> info.pdf info
=> 42.pdf 42
=> syracuse.pdf syracuse
=> sql.pdf sql


## Liens

=> https://github.com/arthur-jacquin GitHub
=> https://www.linkedin.com/in/arthur-jacquin/ LinkedIn
=> mailto:arthur@jacquin.xyz Contact: arthur@jacquin.xyz
